[MUSIC]
The if statement is already
a pretty useful construct, but
we can extend it to make
it even more powerful.
Think about the username
example from the last video.
What if we also wanted to print
a message when the username was valid?
Here, we've included an else
statement to achieve this.
The program can now go in one of two
directions depending on the length of
the username.
If it's not long enough, we get a message
indicating that the username is invalid.
But if the program verifies that
the username is long enough,
it will print a message
saying it is valid.
Pay attention to how the else
statement is written.
It uses the else keyword followed by
a colon to indicate the beginning
of the else block.
Once again, the body of the block
is further indented to the right.
As we've called out before these
blocks can contain multiple lines and
do more than just print messages.
They can do calculations, modify values,
return values, and a lot more.
And remember that you can choose to use
as many or as few spaces as you want for
the indentation, but
you always need to indent and
you always need to use
the same number of spaces.
The else statement is very useful,
but we don't always need it.
Say we want to have a function that
checks if a value is even or odd.
We could do that with
a piece of code like this.
Here, we're using a new operator so
let's first explain that.
The modulo operator is represented
by the percentage sign and
returns the remainder of the integer
division between two numbers.
The integer division is an operation
between integers that yields two results
which are both integers,
the quotient and the remainder.
So if we do an integer division
between 5 and 2, the quotient is 2 and
the remainder is 1.
If we do an integer
division between 11 and 3,
the quotient is 3 and the remainder is 2.
Even numbers are all multiples of 2
which means the remainder of the integer
division between an even number and
2 is always going to be 0.
In this function,
we're using this principle to decide
whether a number is even or not.
So how come we have these two return
statements, one below the other,
without an else statement?
The trick is that when a return
statement is executed,
the function exits so that the code
that follows doesn't get executed.
This means that if the number is even,
the computer will reach the return
true statement and exit the function.
Anything that comes after that will only
be executed if the condition in the if
statement was false.
In other words, once the function
reaches the return false line,
we know for sure that the if condition
was false which means the number was odd.
At first, you might feel more comfortable
including the else statement,
even if it's not needed and
that's totally okay.
It's important to know that both
ways of writing this are correct.
And remember that this technique
can only be used when you're
returning a value inside the if statement.
To recap, the if statement allows
us to branch the execution based on
a specific condition being true.
The else statement lets us set a piece of
code to run only when the condition of
the if statement was false.
If you return a value inside an if block
then the code after the block will only be
executed if the condition was false.
All make sense?
If all these ifs and elses are starting
to get a little confusing, that's okay.
There's a lot to soak up here and the best
way to do that is yeah, you guessed it,
practice.
So review the content and
practice on your own as much as you need.
Once you're done,
meet me over in the next video.